Abdul Alhazred.
Abdul Alhazred'" is a fictional character created by American horror writer H. P. Lovecraft. He is the so-called "Mad Arab" credited with authoring the fictional book "Kitab al-Azif" (the "Necronomicon"), and as such is an integral part of Cthulhu Mythos lore.
Name.
The name "Abdul Alhazred" is a pseudonym that Lovecraft created in his youth, which he took on after reading "1001 Arabian Nights" at the age of about five. The name was invented either by Lovecraft, or by Albert Baker, the Phillips' family lawyer. "Abdul" is a common Arabic name component (but never a name by itself; additionally the ending -ul and the beginning Al- are redundant), but "Alhazred" may allude to "Hazard", a pun on the book's destructive and dangerous nature, or a reference to Lovecraft's ancestors by that name. It might also have been a pun on "all-has-read", since Lovecraft was an avid reader in youth.
Another possibility, raised in an essay by the Swedish fantasy writer and editor Rickard Berghorn, is that the name "Alhazred" was influenced by references to two historical authors whose names were Latinized as "Alhazen": Alhazen ben Josef, who translated Ptolemy into Arabic; and Abu 'Ali al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham, who wrote about optics, mathematics and physics. Ibn al-Haytham is said to have pretended to be mad to escape the wrath of a ruler.
"Abdul Alhazred" is not a real Arabic name, and seems to contain the Arabic definite article morpheme "al-" twice in a row (anomalous in terms of Arabic grammar). The more proper Arabic form might be "Abd-al-Hazred" or "Abdul Hazred". In Arabic translations, his name has appeared as "Abdullah " (عبدالله الحظرد): Arabic 'حظر = "he fenced in", "he prohibited". Hazred could come from the Arabic word "Hazrat" meaning Great Lord with a twist that makes it sound like "red" and "hazard" both indicative of danger. It is also thought by some to be a corruption of sorts on the phrase "All has read," to imply he has read lots, and has immense amounts of knowledge. However Abdul is a common Arabic prefix meaning "Servant" and "Al" is Arabic for "the", and if "hazra" means "he prohibited", "he fenced in" or "Great Lord", then the name would mean "Servant of the Prohibited", "Servant of the Fenced in", or "Servant of the Great Lord" which would make sense considering his role, even if it is not a proper Arabic name.
Similarly, an article (written from an in-universe perspective) in the "Call of Cthulhu" tabletop role-playing game speculates that it may be a corruption of "Abd Al-Azrad", which it claims translates to "The Worshipper of the Great Devourer".
The phrase "mad Arab", sometimes with both words capitalized in Lovecraft's stories, is used so commonly before Alhazred's name that it almost constitutes a title. A reference to the "Mad Arab" in Cthulhu Mythos fiction is invariably a synonym for Abdul Alhazred. Later writers sometimes preface Alhazred with words such as "monk" (such as in the Chick parody tract by Howard Hallis) or "scholar" replacing Arab to avoid any racist overtones.
H. P. Lovecraft.
According to Lovecraft's "History of the Necronomicon" (written 1927, first published 1938), Alhazred was:
In 730, while still living in Damascus, Alhazred supposedly wrote a book of ultimate evil in Arabic, "al-Azif", which would later become known as the "Necronomicon". Those who have dealings with this book usually come to an unpleasant end, and Alhazred was no exception. Again according to Lovecraft's "History":
August Derleth.
August Derleth later made alterations to the biography of Alhazred, such as redating his death to 731. Derleth also changed Alhazred's final fate, as described in his short story "The Keeper of the Key", first published in May 1951. In the story, Professor Laban Shrewsbury (a recurring Derleth character) and his assistant at the time, Nayland Colum, discover Alhazred's burial site.
While the two are heading a caravan from Salalah, Oman, they cross the border into Yemen and find the unexplored desert area that the "Necronomicon" calls "Roba el Ehaliyeh" or "Roba el Khaliyeh" — presumably a reference to the Empty Quarter or "Rub al Khali".
At the center of the area they discover the Nameless City (the setting of the Lovecraft story of the same name) and in Derleth's text the domain of the Great Old One Hastur. Shrewsbury, an old agent of Hastur and the devoted enemy of Hastur's half-brother, Cthulhu, crosses its gates in search of Alhazred's burial site.
He indeed finds Alhazred's burial chamber and learns of his fate. Alhazred had been kidnapped in Damascus and brought to the Nameless City, where he had earlier studied and learned some of the "Necronomicon"s lore. As punishment for betraying their secrets, Alhazred was tortured. Then they blinded him, severed his tongue and executed him.
Although the entrance to the chamber warns against disturbing him, Shrewsbury opens Alhazred's sarcophagus anyway, finding that only rags, bones, and dust remain of Alhazred. However, the sarcophagus also contains Alhazred's personal, incomplete copy of the "Necronomicon", written in the Arabic alphabet. Shrewsbury then uses necromancy to recall Alhazred's spirit and orders it to draw a map of the world as he knew it. After obtaining the map, which reveals the location of R'lyeh and other secret places, Shrewsbury finally lets Alhazred return to his eternal rest.
In non-Mythos fiction.
Like his creation the "Necronomicon", Alhazred is often referenced in works that are not generally considered part of the Cthulhu Mythos, either as a subtle nod to Lovecraft or to create a connection to his world.
In "Diablo III", a travelling scholar named "Abd al-Hazir" is the narrator for many of the game's features. Given the similarities in the two characters' names, professions, written works and generally dark subject matter, it is likely that Lovecraft's Alhazred provided the main inspiration for al-Hazir.
The Mercyful Fate albums "Time" and "Into the Unknown" reference Alhazred.
The MMORPG "Wizard101" features a Krok called Alhazred who teaches Balance magic.
A statue of Alhazred makes a cameo appearance as the "Mad Scholar" in Graham McNeill's book "A Thousand Sons". This novel features sorcerers who become destroyed by forbidden knowledge and takes place in the "Warhammer 40,000" setting, itself utilizing Lovecraftian themes.
Abdul Alhazred acts as vizier to King Calaphim and Queen Allaria in the Land of the Green Isles in '.
In the game ', the library contains a book called "Kitab as-Azif". The character Snake says it was written by Abdul Alhazred and was said to be one of the books used in the creation of the "Necronomicon".
A book by Al-Hazred is mentioned in "The Atrocity Archives" by Charles Stross.
