Allah.
Allah'" (or;, is the Arabic word for "'God'" (literally 'the God', as the initial "Al-" is the definite article). It is used mainly by Muslims to refer to God in Islam, Arab Christians, and often, albeit not exclusively, by Bahá'ís, Arabic-speakers, Indonesian, Malaysian and Maltese Christians, and Mizrahi Jews.
Etymology.
The term "Allāh" is derived from a contraction of the Arabic definite article "al-" "the" and "ilāh" "deity, god" to ' meaning "the [sole] deity, God" (, "ho theos monos").
Cognates of the name "Allāh" exist in other Semitic languages, including Hebrew and Aramaic. Biblical Hebrew mostly uses the plural form (but functional singular) "Elohim". The corresponding Aramaic form is ' in Biblical Aramaic and ' in Syriac as used by the Assyrian Church, both meaning simply 'God'. In the Sikh scriptures, Guru Granth Sahib, the term "Allah" () is used 37 times.
The name was previously used by pagan Meccans as a reference to a creator deity, possibly the supreme deity in pre-Islamic Arabia.
The concepts associated with the term "Allah" (as a deity) differ among religious traditions. In pre-Islamic Arabia amongst pagan Arabs, "Allah" was not considered the sole divinity, having associates and companions, sons and daughters–a concept that was deleted under the process of Islamization. In Islam, the name "Allah" is the supreme and all-comprehensive divine name, and all other divine names are believed to refer back to Allah.
"Allah" is unique, the only Deity, creator of the universe and omnipotent. Arab Christians today use terms such as ' (, 'God the Father') to distinguish their usage from Muslim usage. There are both similarities and differences between the concept of God as portrayed in the Quran and the Hebrew Bible. It has also been applied to certain living human beings as personifications of the term and concept.
Unicode has a codepoint reserved for "Allāh", = U+FDF2. Many Arabic type fonts feature special ligatures for Allah.
Pre-Islamic Arabia.
In pre-Islamic Arabia, Allah was used by Meccans as a reference to the creator-god, possibly the supreme deity.
Allah was not considered the sole divinity; however, Allah was considered the creator of the world and the giver of rain. The notion of the term may have been vague in the Meccan religion. Allah was associated with companions, whom pre-Islamic Arabs considered as subordinate deities. Meccans held that a kind of kinship existed between Allah and the jinn. Allah was thought to have had sons and that the local deities of al-‘Uzzá, Manāt and al-Lāt were His daughters. The Meccans possibly associated angels with Allah. Allah was invoked in times of distress. Muhammad's father's name was meaning 'the slave of Allāh'.
Islam.
Medallion showing "Allah" in Hagia Sophia, Istanbul, Turkey.
According to Islamic belief, Allah is the proper name of God, and humble submission to his will, divine ordinances and commandments is the pivot of the Muslim faith. "He is the only God, creator of the universe, and the judge of humankind." "He is unique (') and inherently one ('), all-merciful and omnipotent." The Qur’an declares "the reality of Allah, His inaccessible mystery, His various names, and His actions on behalf of His creatures."
Allah script outside Eski Cami (The Old Mosque) in Edirne, Turkey.
In Islamic tradition, there are 99 Names of God (' lit. meaning: 'the best names' or 'the most beautiful names'), each of which evoke a distinct characteristic of Allah. All these names refer to Allah, the supreme and all-comprehensive divine name. Among the 99 names of God, the most famous and most frequent of these names are "the Merciful" ("al-Raḥmān") and "the Compassionate" (').
Most Muslims use the untranslated Arabic phrase "Insha'Allah" (meaning 'if God wills') after references to future events. Muslim discursive piety encourages beginning things with the invocation of "Basmala" (meaning 'in the name of God').
There are certain phrases in praise of God that are favored by Muslims, including "Subḥān Allāh" (Holiness be to God), "al-ḥamdu lillāh" (Praise be to God), "Shahada" (There is no deity but God) and "Allāhu akbar" (God is great) as a devotional exercise of remembering God (dhikr). In a Sufi practice known as "dhikr Allah" (lit. remembrance of God), the Sufi repeats and contemplates on the name "Allah" or other divine names while controlling his or her breath.
Some scholars have suggested that Muḥammad used the term "Allah" in addressing both pagan Arabs and Jews or Christians in order to establish a common ground for the understanding of the name for God, a claim Gerhard Böwering says is doubtful. According to Böwering, in contrast with pre-Islamic Arabian polytheism, God in Islam does not have associates and companions, nor is there any kinship between God and jinn. Pre-Islamic pagan Arabs believed in a blind, powerful, inexorable and insensible fate over which man had no control. This was replaced with the Islamic notion of a powerful but provident and merciful God.
According to Francis Edwards Peters, "The Qur’ān insists, Muslims believe, and historians affirm that Muhammad and his followers worship the same God as the Jews (). The Qur’an's Allah is the same Creator God who covenanted with Abraham". Peters states that the Qur’an portrays Allah as both more powerful and more remote than Yahweh, and as a universal deity, unlike Yahweh who closely follows Israelites.
Christianity.
The Aramaic word for "God" in the language of Assyrian Christians is ', or "Alaha". Arabic-speakers of all Abrahamic faiths, including Christians and Jews, use the word "Allah" to mean "God". The Christian Arabs of today have no other word for "God" than "Allah". (Even the Arabic-descended Maltese language of Malta, whose population is almost entirely Roman Catholic, uses "Alla" for "God".) Arab Christians for example use terms ' () meaning God the Father, ' () mean God the Son, and ' () meaning God the Holy Spirit. (See God in Christianity for the Christian concept of God.)
Arab Christians have used two forms of invocations that were affixed to the beginning of their written works. They adopted the Muslim ', and also created their own Trinitized ' as early as the 8th century CE. The Muslim ' reads: "In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful." The Trinitized ' reads: "In the name of Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, One God." The Syriac, Latin and Greek invocations do not have the words "One God" at the end. This addition was made to emphasize the monotheistic aspect of Trinitian belief and also to make it more palatable to Muslims.
According to Marshall Hodgson, it seems that in the pre-Islamic times, some Arab Christians made pilgrimage to the Ka‘bah, a pagan temple at that time, honoring Allah there as God the Creator.
Judaism.
As Hebrew and Arabic are closely related Semitic languages, it is commonly accepted that "Allah" (root, "ilāh") and the Biblical "Elohim" are cognate derivations of same origin, as in "Eloah" a Hebrew word which is used (e.g. in the Book of Job) to mean '(the) God' and also 'god or gods' as in the case of "Elohim", ultimately deriving from the root "El", 'strong', possibly genericized from El (deity), as in the Ugaritic "’lhm" "children of El" (the ancient Near Eastern creator god in pre-Abrahamic tradition).
In Jewish scripture Elohim is used as a descriptive title for the God of the scriptures whose name is YHWH, as well as for pagan gods.
English and other European languages.
The history of the name "Allāh" in English was probably influenced by the study of comparative religion in the 19th century; for example, Thomas Carlyle (1840) sometimes used the term Allah but without any implication that Allah was anything different from God. However, in his biography of Muḥammad (1934), Tor Andræ always used the term "Allah", though he allows that this "conception of God" seems to imply that it is different from that of the Jewish and Christian theologies.
Languages which may not commonly use the term "Allah" to denote God may still contain popular expressions which use the word. For example, because of the centuries long Muslim presence in the Iberian Peninsula, the word "ojalá" in the Spanish language and "oxalá" in the Portuguese language exist today, borrowed from Arabic (Arabic: إن شاء الله). This phrase literally means 'if God wills' (in the sense of "I hope so"). The German poet Mahlmann used the form "Allah" as the title of a poem about the ultimate deity, though it is unclear how much Islamic thought he intended to convey.
Some Muslims leave the name "Allāh" untranslated in English.
Malaysian and Indonesian language.
The first dictionary of Dutch-Malay by A.C. Ruyl, Justus Heurnius, and Caspar Wiltens in 1650 recorded "Allah" as the translation of the Dutch word "Godt".
Christians in Indonesia and Malaysia also use "Allah" to refer to God in the Malaysian language and Indonesian language (both languages forms of the Malay language which is referred to as "Bahasa Melayu").
Mainstream Bible translations in both languages use "Allah" as the translation of Hebrew Elohim (translated in English Bibles as "God"). This goes back to early translation work by Francis Xavier in the 16th century. The first dictionary of Dutch-Malay by A.C. Ruyl, Justus Heurnius, and Caspar Wiltens in 1650 (revised edition from 1623 edition and 1631 Latin-edition) recorded "Allah" as the translation of the Dutch word "Godt". Ruyl also translated Matthew in 1612 to Malay language (first Bible translation to non-European language, only a year after King James Version was published), which was printed in the Netherlands in 1629. Then he translated Mark which was published in 1638.
The government of Malaysia in 2007 outlawed usage of the term "Allah" in any other but Muslim contexts, but the High Court in 2009 revoked the law, ruling that it was unconstitutional. While "Allah" had been used for the Christian God in Malay for more than four centuries, the contemporary controversy was triggered by usage of "Allah" by the Roman Catholic newspaper "The Herald". The government has in turn appealed the court ruling, and the High Court has suspended implementation of its verdict until the appeal is heard.
In other scripts and languages.
Name of ' after the 17th century Ottoman calligrapher Hâfız Osman
' in other languages with Arabic script is spelled in the same way. This includes Urdu, Persian/Dari, Uyghur among others.
Typography.
Allah's name in different writing systems.
The word ' is always written without an aleph to spell the ' vowel. This is because the spelling was settled before Arabic spelling started habitually using ' to spell '. However, in vocalized spelling, a small diacritic ' is added on top of the "shadda" to indicate the pronunciation.
One exception may be in the pre-Islamic Zabad inscription, where it ends with an ambiguous sign that may be a lone-standing "h" with a lengthened start, or may be a non-standard conjoined ':-
Unicode.
Unicode has a codepoint reserved for ', = U+FDF2.
This character, according to the official Unicode specification, is a ligature of "alif-lām-lām-shadda-(superscript alif)-hā" (اللّٰه U+0627 U+0644 U+0644 U+0651 U+0670 U+0647).
An example of ' written in simple Arabic calligraphy.
There is, however some confusion arising from the fact that Arabic typography usually features a ' glyph without the preceding ', which only occurs phrase-initially (or with in Qur'anic orthography). Consequently, the majority of Arabic Unicode fonts do not conform with the specification and have a glyph without the alif at this position (e.g. those provided by, the great majority of those licensed to or developed by, those of, SIL's and the fonts of developed in Pakistan),
while others have the prescribed form with alif (e.g., distributed with the Middle-Eastern version
of the, Arial Unicode MS, and, distributed with and with).
The calligraphic variant of the word used as the Coat of arms of Iran is encoded in Unicode, in the Miscellaneous Symbols range, at codepoint U+262B ().
