Allioideae.
Allioideae'" is the botanical name of a monocot subfamily of flowering plants in the family Amaryllidaceae, order Asparagales. It was formerly treated as a separate family, "'Alliaceae'". The subfamily name is derived from the generic name of the type genus, "Allium".
Successive revisions of the influential Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) classification have changed the circumscription of the family. In the 1998 version, Alliaceae were a distinct family; in the 2003 version, combining the Alliaceae with the Agapanthaceae and the Amaryllidaceae "sensu stricto" was recommended but optional; in the 2009 version, only the broad circumscription of the Amaryllidaceae is allowed, with the Alliaceae reduced to a subfamily, Allioideae.
Note that quite a few of the plants that were once included in family Alliaceae have been assigned to the subfamily Brodiaeoideae (rather than the subfamily Allioideae).
Some of the species of "Allium" are important food plants for example onions ("Allium cepa"), chives ("A. schoenoprasum"), garlic ("A. sativum" and "A. scordoprasum"), and leeks ("A. porrum"). Species of "Allium, Gilliesia, Ipheion, Leucocoryne, Nothoscordum", and "Tulbaghia" are cultivated as ornamentals.
Thirteen of the total of about 20 genera are endemic to temperate South America. "Nothoscordum" ranges from Argentina to Canada. "Allium" is indigenous to most of North America, Eurasia, and North Africa.
The largest genera are "Allium" (260-690 species), "Nothoscordum" (25), and "Tulbaghia" (22). Some of the generic limits are not clear. "Ipheion", "Nothoscordum", and possibly others are not monophyletic.
Allioideae is divided into three tribes: Allieae, Tulbaghieae, and Gilliesieae. Allieae contains only one genus "Allium" ("Milula" is merged with "Allium" in the latest systems). Tulbaghieae contains only "Tulbaghia". Gilliesieae contains the remaining genera. Allieae is sister to a clade composed of "Tulbaghia" and Gilliesieae.
Genera.
, the following genera are included in the Allioideae:
The genera "Androstephium", "Bessera", "Bloomeria", "Brodiaea", "Dandya", "Dichelostemma", "Jaimehintonia", "Milla", "Muilla", "Petronymphe", "Triteleia", and "Triteleiopsis" are now treated in the family Themidaceae. "Petronymphe" is back in Themidaceae after spending a few years in Anthericaceae (now a segregate of Agavaceae).
History.
In 1985, Dahlgren, Clifford, and Yeo defined their Alliaceae to include all of the genera that are now there, plus "Agapanthus" and a group of genera that are now placed in Themidaceae, or its equivalent, the subfamily Brodiaeoideae of Asparagaceae. They divided Alliaceae into three subfamilies: Agapanthoideae, Allioideae, and Gilliesioideae. Agapanthoideae consisted of "Agapanthus" and "Tulbaghia". Allioideae contained two tribes: Brodiaeeae and a broadly defined Allieae. Gilliesioideae was composed of about half of the genera now placed in Gilliesieae, the rest being assigned to Allieae.
In 1996, a molecular phylogenetic study of the rbcL gene showed that "Agapanthus" was misplaced in Alliaceae, and the authors excluded it from the family. They also raised Brodiaeeae to family rank as Themidaceae. They reduced the tribe Allieae to two genera, "Allium" and "Milula", and transferred the rest of Allieae to Gilliesieae. This is the circumscription which the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group accepted in the APG classification of 1998 and which later became known as Alliaceae sensu stricto.
In the APG II system of 2003, Alliaceae could be recognized sensu stricto or sensu lato, as mentioned above. Soon after the publication of APG II, the ICBN conserved the name Amaryllidaceae for the family that had been called Alliaceae sensu lato in APG II.
When the APG III system was published in 2009, the alternative circumscriptions were discontinued and Alliaceae was no longer recognized. Alliaceae sensu stricto became the subfamily Allioideae of Amaryllidaceae sensu lato. Some botanists have not strictly followed the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group and have recognized the smaller version of Alliaceae at family rank.
