Demographics of Armenia.
The demographics of Armenia'" is about the demographic features of the population of Armenia, including population growth, population density, ethnicity, education level, health, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population.
Image:Population armenia.png|thumb|300px|right|Population of Armenia 1950-2010.Data NSSRA
Demographics trends.
After registering a steady increase all through the Soviet period, the population of Armenia declined from 3.604 million in 1991 to 3.211 million in 2003. The latest estimate is 2.872 million on October 12, 2011.
Armenia is the only republic of the former Soviet Union that has a nearly-homogeneous population. It is also the second-most densely populated post-Soviet state after Moldova. Ethnic minorities include Russians, Assyrians, Ukrainians, Yazidi Kurds, Iranians, Greeks, Georgians, and Belarusians. There are also smaller communities of Vlachs, Mordvins, Ossetians, Udis, and Tats. Minorities of Poles and Caucasus Germans also exist though they are heavily Russified.
Most Armenians are Christian, primarily of Oriental Orthodox rite. Armenia is considered the first nation to adopt Christianity, which was first preached in Armenia by two Apostles of Jesus, St. Bartholomew and St. Thaddeus in the 1st century. The Armenian Apostolic Church can trace its roots back to the 3rd and 4th centuries. The country formally adopted the Christian faith in 301 A.D. Over 90% of Armenians belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church, a form of Oriental (Non-Chalcedonianism) Orthodoxy, which is a very ritualistic, conservative church, roughly comparable to the Coptic and Syrian churches. Armenia also has a population of Catholics and evangelical Protestants.
There has been a problem of population decline due to elevated levels of emigration after the break-up of the USSR. The rates of emigration and population decline, however, have decreased drastically in recent years, and a moderate influx of Armenians returning to Armenia have been the main reasons for the trend, which is expected to continue. In fact Armenia is expected to resume its positive population growth by 2010.
Vital statistics.
1 the numbers of life births and deaths until 1959 were calculated from the birth rate and death rate, respectively
2 the high number of deaths in 1988 is related to the Spitak earthquake
Ethnic groups.
Stalin signed decree ordering deportation of Azerbaijanis from Armenian SSR and replacement of foreign Armenians in their houses in December 23, 1947
Ethnic groups changed in Armenian SSR mainly due to the decrees by Stalin to replace Azerbaijanis by Foreign Armenians.
Languages.
Armenian is the only official language. Russian is widely used, especially in education. 94% of adult Armenians considers that it's important their children learn Russian.
Armenia is an observant member of the La Francophonie due to a small percentage of people studying enough French.
The largest communities of the ethnic Armenian diaspora are fluent in English.
