Aloe.
Succulent plants, such as this aloe, store water in their enlarged fleshy leaves, stems, or roots, as shown in this split aloe leaf. This allows them to survive in arid environments. "Aloe vossii"
"'Aloe"', also "Aloë", is a genus containing about 500 species of flowering succulent plants. The most widely known species is "Aloe vera", or "true aloe", so called because, though probably extinct in the wild, it is cultivated as the standard source of so-called "aloe vera" for assorted pharmaceutical purposes. Other species, such as "Aloe ferox" also are cultivated or harvested from the wild for similar applications.
The genus is native to Africa; species are found in southern Africa, the mountains of tropical Africa, various islands off the coast of Africa including Madagascar, and the Arabian Peninsula.
The APG III system (2009) places the genus in the family Xanthorrhoeaceae, subfamily Asphodeloideae. In the past it has also been assigned to families Aloaceae and Liliaceae or lily family. The plant "Agave americana", which is sometimes called "American aloe", belongs to the Asparagaceae, a different family.
Most "Aloe" species have a rosette of large, thick, fleshy leaves. The rosette may appear to be stemless or may be borne on a branched or unbranched stem; some species native to South Africa are treelike. "Aloe" flowers are tubular, frequently yellow, orange, pink or red, and are borne, densely clustered and pendant, at the apex of simple or branched, leafless stems.
Description.
Most "Aloe" species have a rosette of large, thick, fleshy leaves. The leaves are often lance-shaped with a sharp apex and a spiny margin. "Aloe" flowers are tubular, frequently yellow, orange, pink or red, and are borne, densely clustered and pendant, at the apex of simple or branched, leafless stems. Many species of "Aloe" appear to be stemless, with the rosette growing directly at ground level; other varieties may have a branched or unbranched stem from which the fleshy leaves spring. They vary in color from grey to bright-green and are sometimes striped or mottled. Some "Aloes" native to South Africa are arborescent.
The genus is native to tropical and southern Africa, Madagascar, and Jordan to the Arabian Peninsula.
Systematics.
The APG III system (2009) places the genus in the family Xanthorrhoeaceae, subfamily Asphodeloideae. In the past it has also been assigned to the families Liliaceae and Aloeaceae, as well as the family Asphodelaceae, before this was merged into the Xanthorrhoeaceae.
The circumscription of the genus has varied widely. Many genera, such as "Lomatophyllum", have been brought into synonymy. Species at one time placed in "Aloe", such as "Agave americana", have been moved to other genera.
Species.
There are over 500 accepted species in the genus "Aloe", plus even more synonyms and unresolved species, not to mention subspecies, varieties and hybrids. Some of the accepted species are:
Uses.
Aloe species are frequently cultivated as ornamental plants both in gardens and in pots. Many aloe species are highly decorative and are valued by collectors of succulents. "Aloe vera" is used both internally and externally on humans, and is claimed to have some medicinal effects, which have been supported by scientific and medical research. They can also be made into types of special soaps.
Historical uses.
Historical use of various aloe species is well documented. Documentation of the clinical effectiveness is available, although relatively limited.
Of the 500+ species, only a few were used traditionally as a herbal medicine, "Aloe vera" again being the most commonly used species. Also included are "A. perryi" and "A. ferox". The Ancient Greeks and Romans used "Aloe vera" to treat wounds. In the Middle Ages, the yellowish liquid found inside the leaves was favored as a purgative. Unprocessed aloe that contains aloin is generally used as a laxative, whereas processed "Aloe vera" juice does not usually contain significant aloin.
Some species, particularly "Aloe vera", are used in alternative medicine and first aid. Both the translucent inner pulp and the resinous yellow aloin from wounding the aloe plant are used externally to relieve skin discomforts. As an herbal medicine, "Aloe vera" juice is commonly used internally to relieve digestive discomfort.
There have been relatively few studies about possible benefits of aloe gel taken internally. Components of "Aloe" have shown the possibility of inhibiting tumor growth in animal studies, but these effects have not been demonstrated clinically in humans. There have been some studies in animal models which indicate that extracts of "Aloe" have a significant anti-hyperglycemic effect, and may be useful in treating Type II diabetes, but these studies have not been confirmed in humans.
Aloin in OTC laxative products.
On May 9, 2002, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration issued a final rule banning the use of aloin, the yellow sap of the aloe plant for use as a laxative ingredient in over-the-counter drug products. Most aloe juices today do not contain significant aloin.
Chemical properties.
According to W. A. Shenstone, two classes of aloins are to be recognized: (1) nataloins, which yield picric and oxalic acids with nitric acid, and do not give a red coloration with nitric acid; and (2) barbaloins, which yield aloetic acid (C7H2N3O5), chrysammic acid (C7H2N2O6), picric and oxalic acids with nitric acid, being reddened by the acid. This second group may be divided into a-barbaloins, obtained from Barbados "Aloe", and reddened in the cold, and b-barbaloins, obtained from Socotrine and Zanzibar "Aloe", reddened by ordinary nitric acid only when warmed or by fuming acid in the cold. Nataloin (2C17H13O7·H2O) forms bright yellow scales, barbaloin (C17H18O7) prismatic crystals. "Aloe" species also contain a trace of volatile oil, to which its odour is due.
Popular culture.
"Aloe rubrolutea" occurs as a charge in heraldry, such as in the Civic Heraldry of Namibia.
