Angle.
In geometry, an angle'" is the figure formed by two rays, called the "'sides'" of the angle, sharing a common endpoint, called the "'vertex'" of the angle.
Angles are usually presumed to be in a Euclidean plane or in the Euclidean space, but are also defined in non-Euclidean geometries. In particular, in spherical geometry, the spherical angles are defined, using arcs of great circles instead of rays.
"'Angle'" is also used to designate the measure of an angle or of a rotation. This measure is the ratio of the length of a circular arc to its radius. In the case of a geometric angle, the arc is centered at the vertex and delimited by the sides. In the case of a rotation, the arc is centered at the center of the rotation and delimited by any other point and its image by the rotation.
The word "angle" comes from the Latin word "angulus", meaning "a corner". The word "angulus" is a diminutive, of which the primitive form, "angus", does not occur in Latin. Cognate words are the Greek "(ankylοs)", meaning "crooked, curved," and the English word "ankle". Both are connected with the Proto-Indo-European root "*ank-", meaning "to bend" or "bow".
Euclid defines a plane angle as the inclination to each other, in a plane, of two lines which meet each other, and do not lie straight with respect to each other. According to Proclus an angle must be either a quality or a quantity, or a relationship. The first concept was used by Eudemus, who regarded an angle as a deviation from a straight line; the second by Carpus of Antioch, who regarded it as the interval or space between the intersecting lines; Euclid adopted the third concept, although his definitions of right, acute, and obtuse angles are certainly quantitative.
Measuring angles==.
The size of a geometric angle is usually characterized by the magnitude of the smallest rotation that maps one of the rays into the other. Angles that have the same size are sometimes called congruent angles.
In some contexts, such as identifying a point on a circle or describing the "orientation" of an object in two dimensions relative to a reference orientation, angles that differ by an exact multiple of a full turn are effectively equivalent. In other contexts, such as identifying a point on a spiral curve or describing the "cumulative rotation" of an object in two dimensions relative to a reference orientation, angles that differ by a non-zero multiple of a full turn are not equivalent.
In order to measure an angle θ, a circular arc centered at the vertex of the angle is drawn, e.g. with a pair of compasses. The length of the arc s is then divided by the radius of the arc r, and possibly multiplied by a scaling constant k (which depends on the units of measurement that are chosen):
The value of θ thus defined is independent of the size of the circle: if the length of the radius is changed then the arc length changes in the same proportion, so the ratio "s"/"r" is unaltered.
Units.
Units used to represent angles are listed below in descending magnitude order. Of these units, the "degree" and the "radian" are by far the most commonly used. Angles expressed in radians are dimensionless for the purposes of dimensional analysis.
Most units of angular measurement are defined such that one "turn" (i.e. one full circle) is equal to "n" units, for some whole number "n". The two exceptions are the radian and the diameter part. For example, in the case of degrees, A "turn" of "n" units is obtained by setting in the formula above. (Proof. The formula above can be rewritten as One turn, for which units, corresponds to an arc equal in length to the circle's circumference, which is 2π"r", so. Substituting "n" for θ and 2π"r" for "s" in the formula, results in)
Positive and negative angles.
Although the definition of the measurement of an angle does not support the concept of a negative angle, it is frequently useful to impose a convention that allows positive and negative angular values to represent orientations and/or rotations in opposite directions relative to some reference.
In a two dimensional Cartesian coordinate system, an angle is typically defined by its two sides, with its vertex at the origin. The "'initial side'" is on the positive x-axis, while the other side or "'terminal side'" is defined by the measure from the initial side in radians, degrees, or turns. With "'positive angles'" representing rotations toward the positive y-axis and "'negative angles'" representing rotations toward the negative y-axis. When Cartesian coordinates are represented by "'standard position'", defined by the x-axis rightward and the y-axis upward, positive rotations are anticlockwise and negative rotations are clockwise.
In many contexts, an angle of −"θ" is effectively equivalent to an angle of "one full turn minus "θ". For example, an orientation represented as  − 45° is effectively equivalent to an orientation represented as 360° − 45° or 315°. However, a rotation of  − 45° would not be the same as a rotation of 315°.
In three dimensional geometry, "clockwise" and "anticlockwise" have no absolute meaning, so the direction of positive and negative angles must be defined relative to some reference, which is typically a vector passing through the angle's vertex and perpendicular to the plane in which the rays of the angle lie.
In navigation, bearings are measured relative to north. By convention, viewed from above, bearing angle are positive clockwise, so a bearing of 45° corresponds to a north-east orientation. Negative bearings are not used in navigation, so a north-west orientation corresponds to a bearing of 315°.
Alternative ways of measuring the size of an angle.
There are several alternatives to measuring the size of an angle by the corresponding angle of rotation.
The grade of a slope'", or "'gradient'" is equal to the tangent of the angle, or sometimes the sine. Gradients are often expressed as a percentage. For very small values (less than 5%), the grade of a slope is approximately the measure of an angle in radians.
In rational geometry the "spread" between two lines is defined at the square of sine of the angle between the lines. Since the sine of an angle and the sine of its supplementary angle are the same any angle of rotation that maps one of the lines into the other leads to the same value of the spread between the lines.
Astronomical approximations.
Astronomers measure angular separation of objects in degrees from their point of observation.
These measurements clearly depend on the individual subject, and the above should be treated as rough approximations only.
Identifying angles.
In mathematical expressions, it is common to use Greek letters (α, β, γ, θ, φ...) to serve as variables standing for the size of some angle. (To avoid confusion with its other meaning, the symbol π is typically not used for this purpose.) Lower case roman letters (a, b, c...) are also used. See the figures in this article for examples.
In geometric figures, angles may also be identified by the labels attached to the three points that define them. For example, the angle at vertex A enclosed by the rays AB and AC (i.e. the lines from point A to point B and point A to point C) is denoted ∠BAC or [Formula 3] Sometimes, where there is no risk of confusion, the angle may be referred to simply by its vertex ("angle A").
Potentially, an angle denoted, say, ∠BAC might refer to any of four angles: the clockwise angle from B to C, the anticlockwise angle from B to C, the clockwise angle from C to B, or the anticlockwise angle from C to B, where the direction in which the angle is measured determines its sign (see Positive and negative angles). However, in many geometrical situations it is obvious from context that the positive angle less than or equal to 180 degrees is meant, and no ambiguity arises. Otherwise, a convention may be adopted so that ∠BAC always refers to the anticlockwise (positive) angle from B to C, and ∠CAB to the anticlockwise (positive) angle from C to B.
Individual angles.
The names, intervals, and measured units are shown in a table below:
Angles between curves.
The angle between a line and a curve (mixed angle) or between two intersecting curves (curvilinear angle) is defined to be the angle between the tangents at the point of intersection. Various names (now rarely, if ever, used) have been given to particular cases:—"amphicyrtic" (Gr. ', on both sides, "κυρτός", convex) or "cissoidal" (Gr. "κισσός", ivy), biconvex; "xystroidal" or "sistroidal" (Gr. "ξυστρίς", a tool for scraping), concavo-convex; "amphicoelic" (Gr. "κοίλη", a hollow) or "angulus lunularis", biconcave.
Dot product and generalisation.
In the Euclidean plane, the angle θ between two vectors u'" and "'v'" is related to their dot product and their lengths by the formula
This formula supplies an easy method to find the angle between two planes (or curved surfaces) from their normal vectors and between skew lines from their vector equations.
Inner product.
To define angles in an abstract real inner product space, we replace the Euclidean dot product ("'·) by the inner product [Formula 17], i.e.
In a complex inner product space, the expression for the cosine above may give non-real values, so it is replaced with
or, more commonly, using the absolute value, with
The latter definition ignores the direction of the vectors and thus describes the angle between one-dimensional subspaces [Formula 21] and [Formula 22] spanned by the vectors [Formula 23] and [Formula 24] correspondingly.
Angles between subspaces.
The definition of the angle between one-dimensional subspaces [Formula 21] and [Formula 22] given by
in a Hilbert space can be extended to subspaces of any finite dimensions. Given two subspaces [Formula 28] with [Formula 29], this leads to a definition of [Formula 30] angles called canonical or principal angles between subspaces.
Angles in Riemannian geometry.
In Riemannian geometry, the metric tensor is used to define the angle between two tangents. Where "U" and "V" are tangent vectors and "g'ij" are the components of the metric tensor "G",
Angles in geography and astronomy.
In geography, the location of any point on the Earth can be identified using a geographic coordinate system'". This system specifies the latitude and longitude of any location in terms of angles subtended at the centre of the Earth, using the equator and (usually) the Greenwich meridian as references.
In astronomy, a given point on the celestial sphere (that is, the apparent position of an astronomical object) can be identified using any of several "'astronomical coordinate systems'", where the references vary according to the particular system. Astronomers measure the "'angular separation'" of two stars by imagining two lines through the centre of the Earth, each intersecting one of the stars. The angle between those lines can be measured, and is the angular separation between the two stars.
Astronomers also measure the "'apparent size of objects as an angular diameter. For example, the full moon has an angular diameter of approximately 0.5°, when viewed from Earth. One could say, "The Moon's diameter subtends an angle of half a degree." The small-angle formula can be used to convert such an angular measurement into a distance/size ratio.
