Articles of Faith.
Articles of faith'" are sets of beliefs usually found in creeds, sometimes numbered, and often beginning with "We believe...", which attempt to more or less define the fundamental theology of a given religion, and especially in the Christian Church.
Articles of the apostles.
The earliest articles of faith were said to have been composed in the first century by the apostles themselves and sung publicly while on mission (see Old Roman Symbol).
Articles of Nicea.
The Nicene Creed and the shorter Apostles' Creed are articles, or professions of Faith said by members of the Roman Catholic Church and the Anglican Communion.
The Nicene Creed is predominantly recited during the mass while the Apostles' is typically used for other occasions, healings, etc. It strongly asserts belief in the Holy Trinity, the incarnation, the nativity, the passion of Christ, the resurrection, the atonement, the judgement of the living.
Articles of Chalcedon.
The articles of the Chalcedonian Creed reaffirm belief in the dyophysitism of Christ: two natures, one co-substantial person.
The Thirty Nine Articles.
The Thirty-Nine Articles are the historic defining statements of Anglicanism doctrine.
Other articles and creeds.
The confession of faith of Westminster is one of many evangelical creeds that give articles of faith based on sola scriptura rather than on the living experience of the Church. Many evangelical creeds will restate traditional Calvinist or Arminian theology, such as belief in biblical inerrancy and creation.
Latter Day Saint movement.
Within the sects of the Latter Day Saint movement, the "Articles of Faith" are a list composed by Joseph Smith, Jr. as part of an 1842 letter sent to "Long" John Wentworth, editor of the "Chicago Democrat".
Islam.
There are six traditional articles of faith among Muslims, consisting of belief in:
In Sahih Al-Muslim and Al-Bukhari, Prophet Muhammad explains, "It (Al-Iman/faith) is to affirm your faith in God, His angels, His Books His Messengers and the Last Day, and to believe in the Divine Destiny whether it be good or bad."
Prophets in here refer to previous prophets such as Adam, Abraham, Noah, Moses, Jacob, David, Solomon and so on all the way until Jesus and Muhammed.
The word "scriptures" refers to the original scriptures that were given to certain prophets. Moses received the Torah (Tawrat), David received the Psalms (Zabur), Jesus inspired the Gospels (Injil), and Muhammed received the Qur'an.
Judaism.
There is not a formal creed within Judaism, though one has become especially authoritative. Although controversial at its time, the 13 principles laid out by the 12th century Spanish Jewish philosopher Maimonides are now considered mostly normative. They are formalized in the prayerbook following daily morning services. Each principle preceded by "Ani Ma'amin B'emunah Shleymah", "I believe with perfect faith that..." These principles are reflected in the hymn Yigdal.
Sikh.
The Sikh articles of faith are the Five K's:
