Azincourt.
Azincourt'" (; historically, "'Agincourt'" in English) is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in northern France.
Geography.
Situated 12 miles (20 km) north-west of Saint-Pol-sur-Ternoise on the D71 road between Hesdin and Fruges
Etymology.
The town's name is attested as "Aisincurt" in 1175, derived from a Germanic masculine name Aizo, Aizino and the early Northern French word "curt" 'farm with a courtyard' (Late Latin "cortem"). It has no etymological connection in French with Agincourt, Meurthe-et-Moselle (attested as "Egincourt" 875), which is derived from another Germanic male name "*Ingin-".
History.
Azincourt is famous as being near the site of the battle fought on 25 October 1415 in which the army led by King Henry V of England defeated the forces led by Charles d'Albret on behalf of Charles VI of France, which has gone down in English history as the Battle of Agincourt. According to M. Forrest, the French knights were so encumbered by their armour that they were exhausted even before the start of the battle.
Later on, when he became king in 1509, Henry VIII is supposed to have commissioned an English translation of a Life of Henry V so that he could emulate him, on the grounds that he thought that launching a campaign against France would help him to impose himself on the European stage. In 1513, Henry VIII conclusively crossed the English Channel and stopped at Azincourt. He was notably accompanied by John Nevill.
The battle, as was the tradition, was named after a nearby castle called Azincourt. The castle has since disappeared and the settlement now known as Azincourt adopted the name in the 17th Century.
Sights.
The original battlefield museum in the village featured model knights made out of Action Man figures. However, this has now been replaced by a more professional exhibition space incorporating laser, video, slide shows, audio commentaries, and some interactive elements. The museum building is shaped like a longbow similar to those used at the battle by archers under King Henry.
, a medieval festival commemorating local history has been held in the village once in every year since 2004, on a July weekend in the summer. Initially the festival was held in October, but due to the inclement weather and local heavy clay soil (like the battle) making the festival difficult it was moved to July.
International relations.
Azincourt is twinned with the English village of Middleham in North Yorkshire.
