Alligatoridae.
Alligatoridae'" is a family of crocodylians that includes alligators and caimans.
True alligators.
The lineage including alligators proper (Alligatorinae) occur in the fluvial deposits of the age of the Upper Chalk in Europe, where they did not die out until the Pliocene age. The true alligators are today represented to two species, "A. mississippiensis" in the southeastern United States, which can grow to 4.24 m (14 ft) and weigh 1000 lbs (454.5 kg) and the small "A. sinensis" in the Yangtze River, People's Republic of China, which grows to an average of 1.5 m (5 ft). Their name derives from the Spanish "el lagarto", which means "the lizard".
Caimans.
In Central and South America, the alligator family is represented by five species of the genus "Caiman", which differs from the alligator by the absence of a bony septum between the nostrils, and the ventral armour is composed of overlapping bony scutes, each of which is formed of two parts united by a suture. Some authorities further divide this genus into three, splitting off the smooth-fronted caimans into a genus "Paleosuchus" and the Black Caiman into "Melanosuchus". Caimans tend to be more agile and crocodile-like in their movements, and have longer, sharper teeth than alligators.
"C. crocodilus", the Spectacled Caiman, has the widest distribution, from southern Mexico to the northern half of Argentina, and grows to a modest size of about 2.2 meters. The largest is the near-threatened "Melanosuchus niger", the Jacare-assu, Large, or Black Caiman of the Amazon River basin. Black Caimans grow to 16.5 feet (5 m), with the largest recorded size 5.79 m (19 ft). The black caiman and American Alligator are the only members of the alligator family that pose the same danger to humans as the larger species of the crocodile family.
Although the Caiman has not been studied in-depth, scientists have learned that their mating cycles (previously thought to be spontaneous or year-round) are linked to the rainfall cycles and the river levels, which increases chances of survival for their offspring.
Differences from crocodiles.
Alligators differ from crocodiles principally in having wider and shorter heads, with more obtuse snouts; in having the fourth, enlarged tooth of the under jaw received, not into an external notch, but into a pit formed for it within the upper one; in lacking a jagged fringe which appears on the hind legs and feet of the crocodile; in having the toes of the hind feet webbed not more than half way to the tips; and an intolerance to salinity, alligators strongly preferring fresh water, while crocodiles can tolerate salt water due to specialized glands for filtering out salt. In general, crocodiles tend to be more dangerous to humans than alligators. Another odd trait recently discovered is that both caimans and the American Alligator have been observed taking foliage and fruit into their diet in addition to their normal diet of fish and meat.
