Analysis of variance.
Analysis of variance'" ("'ANOVA'") is a collection of statistical models used to analyze the differences between group means and their associated procedures (such as "variation" among and between groups), in which the observed variance in a particular variable is partitioned into components attributable to different sources of variation. In its simplest form, ANOVA provides a statistical test of whether or not the means of several groups are all equal, and therefore generalizes "t"-test to more than two groups. Doing multiple two-sample t-tests would result in an increased chance of committing a type I error. For this reason, ANOVAs are useful in comparing (testing) three or more means (groups or variables) for statistical significance.
Background and terminology.
ANOVA is a particular form of statistical hypothesis testing heavily used in the analysis of experimental data. A statistical hypothesis test is a method of making decisions using data. A test result (calculated from the null hypothesis and the sample) is called statistically significant if it is deemed unlikely to have occurred by chance, "assuming the truth of the null hypothesis". A statistically significant result (when a probability (p-value) is less than a threshold (significance level)) justifies the rejection of the null hypothesis.
In the typical application of ANOVA, the null hypothesis is that all groups are simply random samples of the same population. This implies that all treatments have the same effect (perhaps none). Rejecting the null hypothesis implies that different treatments result in altered effects.
By construction, hypothesis testing limits the rate
of Type I errors (false positives leading to false scientific claims)
to a significance level. Experimenters also wish to limit Type II
errors (false negatives resulting in missed scientific discoveries).
The Type II error rate is a function of several things including
sample size (positively correlated with experiment cost), significance
level (when the standard of proof is high, the chances of overlooking
a discovery are also high) and effect size (when the effect is
obvious to the casual observer, Type II error rates are low).
The terminology of ANOVA is largely from the statistical
design of experiments. The experimenter adjusts factors and
measures responses in an attempt to determine an effect. Factors are
assigned to experimental units by a combination of randomization and
blocking to ensure the validity of the results. Blinding keeps the
weighing impartial. Responses show a variability that is partially
the result of the effect and is partially random error.
ANOVA is the synthesis of several ideas and it is used for multiple
purposes. As a consequence, it is difficult to define concisely or precisely.
"Classical ANOVA for balanced data does three things at once:
In short, ANOVA is a statistical tool used in several ways to develop and confirm an explanation for the observed data.
ANOVA "has long enjoyed the status of being the most used'" (some would
say abused) statistical technique in psychological research."
ANOVA "is probably the "'most useful'" technique in the field of
ANOVA is difficult to teach, particularly for complex experiments, with split-plot designs being notorious. In some cases the proper
application of the method is best determined by problem pattern recognition
followed by the consultation of a classic authoritative test.
Design-of-experiments terms.
(Condensed from the NIST Engineering Statistics handbook: Section 5.7. A
Classes of models.
There are three classes of models used in the analysis of variance, and these are outlined here.
Fixed-effects models (Model 1).
The fixed-effects model of analysis of variance applies to situations in which the experimenter applies one or more treatments to the subjects of the experiment to see if the response variable values change. This allows the experimenter to estimate the ranges of response variable values that the treatment would generate in the population as a whole.
Random-effects models (Model 2).
Random effects models are used when the treatments are not fixed. This occurs when the various factor levels are sampled from a larger population. Because the levels themselves are random variables, some assumptions and the method of contrasting the treatments (a multi-variable generalization of simple differences) differ from the fixed-effects model.
Mixed-effects models (Model 3).
A mixed-effects model contains experimental factors of both fixed and random-effects types, with appropriately different interpretations and analysis for the two types.
Teaching experiments could be performed by a university department
to find a good introductory textbook, with each text considered a
treatment. The fixed-effects model would compare a list of candidate
texts. The random-effects model would determine whether important
differences exist among a list of randomly selected texts. The
mixed-effects model would compare the (fixed) incumbent texts to
Defining fixed and random effects has proven elusive, with competing
definitions arguably leading toward a linguistic quagmire.
Assumptions of ANOVA.
The analysis of variance has been studied from several approaches, the most common of which uses a linear model that relates the response to the treatments and blocks. Even when the statistical model is nonlinear, it can be approximated by a linear model for which an analysis of variance may be appropriate.
Textbook analysis using a normal distribution.
The analysis of variance can be presented in terms of a linear model, which makes the following assumptions about the probability distribution of the responses:
The separate assumptions of the textbook model imply that the errors are independently, identically, and normally distributed for fixed effects models, that is, that the errors ([Formula 1]'s) are independent and
Randomization-based analysis.
In a randomized controlled experiment, the treatments are randomly assigned to experimental units, following the experimental protocol. This randomization is objective and declared before the experiment is carried out. The objective random-assignment is used to test the significance of the null hypothesis, following the ideas of C. S. Peirce and Ronald A. Fisher. This design-based analysis was discussed and developed by Francis J. Anscombe at Rothamsted Experimental Station and by Oscar Kempthorne at Iowa State University. Kempthorne and his students make an assumption of "unit treatment additivity", which is discussed in the books of Kempthorne and David R. Cox.
Unit-treatment additivity.
In its simplest form, the assumption of unit-treatment additivity states that the observed response [Formula 3] from experimental unit [Formula 4] when receiving treatment [Formula 5] can be written as the sum of the unit's response [Formula 6] and the treatment-effect [Formula 7], that is
The assumption of unit-treatment addivity implies that, for every treatment [Formula 5], the [Formula 5]th treatment have exactly the same effect [Formula 11] on every experiment unit.
The assumption of unit treatment additivity usually cannot be directly falsified, according to Cox and Kempthorne. However, many "consequences" of treatment-unit additivity can be falsified. For a randomized experiment, the assumption of unit-treatment additivity "implies" that the variance is constant for all treatments. Therefore, by contraposition, a necessary condition for unit-treatment additivity is that the variance is constant.
The use of unit treatment additivity and randomization is similar to the design-based inference that is standard in finite-population survey sampling.
Derived linear model.
Kempthorne uses the randomization-distribution and the assumption of "unit treatment additivity" to produce a "derived linear model", very similar to the textbook model discussed previously. The test statistics of this derived linear model are closely approximated by the test statistics of an appropriate normal linear model, according to approximation theorems and simulation studies. However, there are differences. For example, the randomization-based analysis results in a small but (strictly) negative correlation between the observations. In the randomization-based analysis, there is "no assumption" of a "normal" distribution and certainly "no assumption" of "independence". On the contrary, "the observations are dependent"!
The randomization-based analysis has the disadvantage that its exposition involves tedious algebra and extensive time. Since the randomization-based analysis is complicated and is closely approximated by the approach using a normal linear model, most teachers emphasize the normal linear model approach. Few statisticians object to model-based analysis of balanced randomized experiments.
Statistical models for observational data.
However, when applied to data from non-randomized experiments or observational studies, model-based analysis lacks the warrant of randomization. For observational data, the derivation of confidence intervals must use "subjective" models, as emphasized by Ronald A. Fisher and his followers. In practice, the estimates of treatment-effects from observational studies generally are often inconsistent. In practice, "statistical models" and observational data are useful for suggesting hypotheses that should be treated very cautiously by the public.
Summary of assumptions.
The normal-model based ANOVA analysis assumes the independence, normality and
homogeneity of the variances of the residuals. The
randomization-based analysis assumes only the homogeneity of the
variances of the residuals (as a consequence of unit-treatment
additivity) and uses the randomization procedure of the experiment.
Both these analyses require homoscedasticity, as an assumption for the normal-model analysis and as a consequence of randomization and additivity for the randomization-based analysis.
change variances rather than means (called dispersion effects) have
been successfully conducted using ANOVA. There are
"no" necessary assumptions for ANOVA in its full generality, but the
F-test used for ANOVA hypothesis testing has assumptions and practical
limitations which are of continuing interest.
Problems which do not satisfy the assumptions of ANOVA can often be transformed to satisfy the assumptions.
The property of unit-treatment additivity is not invariant under a "change of scale", so statisticians often use transformations to achieve unit-treatment additivity. If the response variable is expected to follow a parametric family of probability distributions, then the statistician may specify (in the protocol for the experiment or observational study) that the responses be transformed to stabilize the variance. Also, a statistician may specify that logarithmic transforms be applied to the responses, which are believed to follow a multiplicative model.
According to Cauchy's functional equation theorem, the logarithm is the only continuous transformation that transforms real multiplication to addition.
Characteristics of ANOVA.
ANOVA is used in the analysis of comparative experiments, those in
which only the difference in outcomes is of interest. The statistical
significance of the experiment is determined by a ratio of two
variances. This ratio is independent of several possible alterations
to the experimental observations: Adding a constant to all
observations does not alter significance. Multiplying all
observations by a constant does not alter significance. So ANOVA
statistical significance results are independent of constant bias and
scaling errors as well as the units used in expressing observations.
In the era of mechanical calculation it was common to
subtract a constant from all observations (when equivalent to
dropping leading digits) to simplify data entry. This is an example of data
Logic of ANOVA.
The calculations of ANOVA can be characterized as computing a number
of means and variances, dividing two variances and comparing the ratio
to a handbook value to determine statistical significance. Calculating
a treatment effect is then trivial, "the effect of any treatment is
estimated by taking the difference between the mean of the
observations which receive the treatment and the general mean."
Partitioning of the sum of squares.
ANOVA uses traditional standardized terminology. The definitional
divisor is called the degrees of freedom (DF), the summation is called
the sum of squares (SS), the result is called the mean square (MS) and
the squared terms are deviations from the sample mean. ANOVA
estimates 3 sample variances: a total variance based on all the
observation deviations from the grand mean, an error variance based on
all the observation deviations from their appropriate
treatment means and a treatment variance. The treatment variance is
based on the deviations of treatment means from the grand mean, the
result being multiplied by the number of observations in each
treatment to account for the difference between the variance of
observations and the variance of means. If the null hypothesis is
true, all three variance estimates are equal (within sampling error).
The fundamental technique is a partitioning of the total sum of squares "SS" into components related to the effects used in the model. For example, the model for a simplified ANOVA with one type of treatment at different levels.
The number of degrees of freedom "DF" can be partitioned in a similar way: one of these components (that for error) specifies a chi-squared distribution which describes the associated sum of squares, while the same is true for "treatments" if there is no treatment effect.
See also Lack-of-fit sum of squares.
The F-test.
The F-test is used for comparisons of the components of the total deviation. For example, in one-way, or single-factor ANOVA, statistical significance is tested for by comparing the F test statistic
where "MS" is mean square, [Formula 17] = number of treatments and
[Formula 18] = total number of cases
to the F-distribution with [Formula 19], [Formula 20] degrees of freedom. Using the F-distribution is a natural candidate because the test statistic is the ratio of two scaled sums of squares each of which follows a scaled chi-squared distribution.
The expected value of F is [Formula 21] (where n is the treatment sample size)
which is 1 for no treatment effect. As values of F increase above 1
the evidence is increasingly inconsistent with the null hypothesis.
Two apparent experimental methods of increasing F are increasing the
sample size and reducing the error variance by tight experimental
The textbook method of concluding the hypothesis test is to compare
the observed value of F with the critical value of F determined from
tables. The critical value of F is a function of the numerator
degrees of freedom, the denominator degrees of freedom and the
significance level (α). If F ≥ FCritical (Numerator DF, Denominator DF, α)
The computer method calculates the probability (p-value) of a value of
F greater than or equal to the observed value. The null hypothesis is
rejected if this probability is less than or equal to the significance
level (α). The two methods produce the same result.
The ANOVA F-test is known to be nearly optimal in the sense of
minimizing false negative errors for a fixed rate of false positive
errors (maximizing power for a fixed significance level). To test the hypothesis that all treatments have exactly the same effect, the F-test's p-values closely approximate the permutation test's p-values: The approximation is particularly close when the design is balanced. Such permutation tests characterize tests with maximum power against all alternative hypotheses, as observed by Rosenbaum. The ANOVA F–test (of the null-hypothesis that all treatments have exactly the same effect) is recommended as a practical test, because of its robustness against many alternative distributions.
Extended logic.
ANOVA consists of separable parts; partitioning sources of variance
and hypothesis testing can be used individually. ANOVA is used to
support other statistical tools. Regression is first used to fit more
complex models to data, then ANOVA is used to compare models with the
objective of selecting simple(r) models that adequately describe the
data. "Such models could be fit without any reference to ANOVA, but
ANOVA tools could then be used to make some sense of the fitted models,
and to test hypotheses about batches of coefficients."
"[W]e think of the analysis of variance as a way of understanding and structuring
multilevel models—not as an alternative to regression but as a tool
for summarizing complex high-dimensional inferences ..."
ANOVA for a single factor.
The simplest experiment suitable for ANOVA analysis is the completely
randomized experiment with a single factor. More complex experiments
with a single factor involve constraints on randomization and include
completely randomized blocks and Latin squares (and variants:
Graeco-Latin squares, etc.). The more complex experiments share many
of the complexities of multiple factors. A relatively complete
discussion of the analysis (models, data summaries, ANOVA table) of
ANOVA for multiple factors.
ANOVA generalizes to the study of the effects of multiple factors.
When the experiment includes observations at all combinations of
levels of each factor, it is termed factorial.
are more efficient than a series of single factor experiments and the
efficiency grows as the number of factors increases. Consequently, factorial designs are heavily used.
The use of ANOVA to study the effects of multiple factors has a
complication. In a 3-way ANOVA with factors x, y and z, the ANOVA
model includes terms for the main effects (x, y, z) and
terms for interactions (xy, xz, yz, xyz).
All terms require hypothesis tests. The proliferation of interaction
that some hypothesis test will produce a false positive by chance.
Fortunately, experience says that high order interactions are rare.
The ability to detect interactions is a major advantage of multiple
factor ANOVA. Testing one factor at a time hides interactions, but
Caution is advised when encountering interactions; Test
interaction terms first and expand the analysis beyond ANOVA if
interactions are found. Texts vary in their recommendations regarding
the continuation of the ANOVA procedure after encountering an
interaction. Interactions complicate the interpretation of
experimental data. Neither the calculations of significance nor the
estimated treatment effects can be taken at face value. "A
significant interaction will often mask the significance of main
to enhance understanding. Regression is often useful. A lengthy
discussion of interactions is available in Cox (1958). Some
interactions can be removed (by transformations) while others cannot.
A variety of techniques are used with multiple factor ANOVA to reduce
expense. One technique used in factorial designs is to minimize
replication (possibly no replication with support of
groups when effects are found to be
statistically (or practically) insignificant. An experiment with many
insignificant factors may collapse into one with a few factors
Worked numeric examples.
Several fully worked numerical examples are available. A
simple case uses one-way (a single
factor) analysis. A more complex case
Associated analysis.
Some analysis is required in support of the "design" of the
experiment while other analysis is performed after changes in the
factors are formally found to produce statistically significant
changes in the responses. Because experimentation is iterative, the
results of one experiment alter plans for following experiments.
The number of experimental units.
In the design of an experiment, the number of experimental units is planned to satisfy the goals of the experiment. Experimentation is often sequential.
Early experiments are often designed to provide mean-unbiased estimates of treatment effects and of experimental error. Later experiments are often designed to test a hypothesis that a treatment effect has an important magnitude; in this case, the number of experimental units is chosen so that the experiment is within budget and has adequate power, among other goals.
Reporting sample size analysis is generally required in psychology.
"Provide information on sample size and the process that led to sample
is written in the experimental protocol before the experiment is conducted, is examined in grant applications and administrative review boards.
Besides the power analysis, there are less formal methods for selecting the number of experimental units. These include graphical methods based on limiting
the probability of false negative errors, graphical methods based on
an expected variation increase (above the residuals) and methods based
on achieving a desired confident interval.
Power analysis.
Power analysis is often applied in the context of ANOVA in order to assess the probability of successfully rejecting the null hypothesis if we assume a certain ANOVA design, effect size in the population, sample size and significance level. Power analysis can assist in study design by determining what sample size would be required in order to have a reasonable chance of rejecting the null hypothesis when the alternative hypothesis is true.
Effect size.
Several standardized measures of effect gauge the strength of the association between a predictor (or set of predictors) and the dependent variable. Effect-size estimates facilitate the comparison of findings in studies and across disciplines. A non-standardized measure of effect size with meaningful units may
Eta-squared describes the ratio of variance explained in the dependent variable by a predictor while controlling for other predictors. Eta-squared is a biased estimator of the variance explained by the model in the population (it estimates only the effect size in the sample). On average it overestimates the variance explained in the population. As the sample size gets larger the amount of bias gets smaller,
Cohen (1992) suggests effect sizes for various indexes, including ƒ (where 0.1 is a small effect, 0.25 is a medium effect and 0.4 is a large effect). He also offers a conversion table (see Cohen, 1988, p. 283) for eta squared (η2) where 0.0099 constitutes a small effect, 0.0588 a medium effect and 0.1379 a large effect.
Followup analysis.
It is always appropriate to carefully consider outliers. They have a
disproportionate impact on statistical conclusions and are often the
Model confirmation.
It is prudent to verify that the assumptions of ANOVA have been met.
Residuals are examined or analyzed to confirm homoscedasticity
and gross normality. Residuals should have the appearance of (zero mean normal distribution)
noise when plotted as a function of anything including time and
modeled data values. Trends hint at interactions among factors or
among observations. One rule of thumb: "If the largest standard deviation
is less than twice the smallest standard deviation, we can use methods
based on the assumption of equal standard deviations and our results
Follow-up tests.
A statistically significant effect in ANOVA is often followed up with one or more different follow-up tests. This can be done in order to assess which groups are different from which other groups or to test various other focused hypotheses.
Follow-up tests are often distinguished in terms of whether they are planned (a priori) or post hoc. Planned tests are determined before looking at the data and post hoc tests are performed after looking at the data.
Often one of the "treatments" is none, so the treatment group can act
as a control. Dunnett's test (a modification of the t-test)
tests whether each of the other treatment groups has the same
Post hoc tests such as Tukey's range test most commonly compare every group mean with every other group mean and typically incorporate some method of controlling for Type I errors.
Comparisons, which are most commonly planned, can be either simple or compound. Simple comparisons compare one group mean with one other group mean. Compound comparisons typically compare two sets of groups means where one set has two or more groups (e.g., compare average group means of group A, B and C with group D). Comparisons can also look at tests of trend, such as linear and quadratic relationships, when the independent variable involves ordered levels.
Following ANOVA with pair-wise multiple-comparison tests has been
criticized on several grounds. There are many such tests (10 in one table) and recommendations
regarding their use are vague or conflicting.
Study designs and ANOVAs.
There are several types of ANOVA. Many statisticians base ANOVA on the design of the experiment, especially on the protocol that specifies the random assignment of treatments to subjects; the protocol's description of the assignment mechanism should include a specification of the structure of the treatments and of any blocking. It is also common to apply ANOVA to observational data using an appropriate statistical model.
Some popular designs use the following types of ANOVA:
ANOVA cautions.
Balanced experiments (those with an equal sample size for each
treatment) are relatively easy to interpret; Unbalanced
experiments offer more complexity. For single factor (one way) ANOVA,
the adjustment for unbalanced data is easy, but the unbalanced
analysis lacks both robustness and power. For more complex designs the
lack of balance leads to further complications. "The orthogonality
property of main effects and interactions present in balanced data
does not carry over to the unbalanced case. This
means that the usual analysis of variance techniques do not apply.
Consequently, the analysis of unbalanced factorials is much more
difficult than that for balanced designs." In the
general case, "The analysis of variance can also be applied to
unbalanced data, but then the sums of squares, mean squares, and
F-ratios will depend on the order in which the sources of variation
are considered." The simplest techniques for
handling unbalanced data restore balance by either throwing out data
or by synthesizing missing data. More complex techniques use
ANOVA is (in part) a significance test. The American Psychological
Association holds the view that simply reporting significance is
insufficient and that reporting confidence bounds is preferred.
While ANOVA is conservative (in maintaining a significance level)
against multiple comparisons in one dimension, it is not conservative
Generalizations.
ANOVA is considered to be a special case of linear regression
which in turn is a special case of the general linear model. All consider the observations to be the sum of a model (fit) and a residual (error) to be minimized.
The Kruskal–Wallis test and the Friedman test are nonparametric tests, which do not rely on an assumption of normality.
History.
While the analysis of variance reached fruition in the 20th century,
antecedents extend centuries into the past according to Stigler. These include hypothesis testing, the partitioning of sums of
squares, experimental techniques and the additive model. Laplace was
performing hypothesis testing in the 1770s.
The development of least-squares methods by Laplace and Gauss circa
1800 provided an improved method of combining observations (over the
existing practices of astronomy and geodesy). It also initiated much
study of the contributions to sums of squares. Laplace soon knew how
to estimate a variance from a residual (rather than a total) sum of
squares. By 1827 Laplace was using least
squares methods to address ANOVA problems regarding measurements of
Before 1800 astronomers had isolated observational errors resulting
from reaction times (the "personal equation") and had developed
methods of reducing the errors. The
experimental methods used in the study of the personal equation were
later accepted by the emerging field of psychology which developed strong
(full factorial) experimental methods to which randomization and
blinding were soon added. An eloquent
non-mathematical explanation of the additive effects model was
Sir Ronald Fisher introduced the term "variance" and proposed a formal analysis of variance in a 1918 article "The Correlation Between Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance". His first application of the analysis of variance was published in 1921. Analysis of variance became widely known after being included in Fisher's 1925 book "Statistical Methods for Research Workers".
Randomization models were developed by several researchers. The first was
published in Polish by Neyman in 1923.
One of the attributes of ANOVA which ensured its early popularity was
computational elegance. The structure of the additive model allows
solution for the additive coefficients by simple algebra rather than
by matrix calculations. In the era of mechanical calculators this
simplicity was critical. The determination of statistical
significance also required access to tables of the F function which
were supplied by early statistics texts.
