Austrian School.
The Austrian School of economics'" is a school of economic thought which bases its study of economic phenomena on the interpretation and analysis of the purposeful actions of individuals. It derives its name from its origin in late-19th and early-20th century Vienna with the work of Carl Menger, Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, Friedrich von Wieser, and others. Currently, adherents of the Austrian School can come from any part of the world, but they are often referred to as "Austrian economists" or "Austrians" and their work as "Austrian economics".
Among the contributions of the Austrian School to economic theory are the subjective theory of value, marginalism in price theory, and the formulation of the economic calculation problem.
Many economists are critical of the current-day Austrian School and consider its rejection of econometrics, experimental economics and aggregate macroeconomic analysis to be outside of mainstream economic theory, or "heterodox". Austrians are likewise critical of mainstream economics. The Austrian School attracted renewed academic and public interest after Friedrich von Hayek's sharing of the 1974 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, but in 1995 G. Meijer described it as a heterodox or fringe strain of economic thought.
Methodology.
The Austrian School begins its analysis of the observed economy by investigating the viewpoints and motivations which underlie the actions of each individual. This approach, termed "methodological individualism", or "radical subjectivism", differs significantly from other schools of economic thought, which place less importance on individual knowledge, time, expectation, and other subjective factors and instead tend to focus on equilibrium analysis.
In 1949, Ludwig von Mises codified his version of the subjectivist approach, which he called "praxeology," in a book published in English as "Human Action". In it, Mises presented an extensive statement of his method, and stated that praxeology could be used to deduce "a priori" theoretical economic truths. Mises also argued against the use of probabilities in economic models. According to Mises, deductive economic thought experiment, if performed correctly, can yield conclusions that follow irrefutably from the underlying assumptions and could not be discovered by empirical observation or statistical inference. Since Mises time, however, few Austrian thinkers have adopted Mises' entire praxeological approach and many have adopted alternative versions. For example, Fritz Machlup, Friedrich von Hayek, and others, did not take Mises' strong "a priori" approach to economics.
Economist Paul A. Samuelson has written that most economists assert that conclusions reached by pure logical deduction are limited and weak. According to Samuelson and economist Bryan Caplan, this aspect of Austrian School methodology has led it to be widely dismissed within mainstream economics. Caplan has stated that the Austrian challenge to the realism of neoclassical assumptions actually helps make those assumptions more plausible.
Starting in the Twentieth Century, various Austrians incorporated models and mathematics into their analysis of the economy. Austrian economist Steven Horwitz argues that Austrian methodology is consistent with macroeconomics and that Austrian macroeconomics can be expressed in terms of microeconomic foundations. Austrian economist Roger Garrison argues that Austrian macroeconomic theory can be correctly expressed in terms of diagrammatic models. In 1944, Austrian economist Oskar Morgenstern presented a rigorous schematization of an ordinal utility function (the Von Neumann–Morgenstern utility theorem) in Theory of Games and Economic Behavior.
Opportunity cost.
The opportunity cost doctrine was first explicitly formulated by the Austrian economist Friedrich von Wieser in the late 19th century. Opportunity cost is the cost of any activity measured in terms of the value of the next best alternative foregone (that is not chosen). It is the sacrifice related to the second best choice available to someone, or group, who has picked among several mutually exclusive choices. This view is currently held by contemporary economists of all mainstream schools of thought.
Opportunity cost is a key concept in economics, and has been described as expressing "the basic relationship between scarcity and choice". The notion of opportunity cost plays a crucial part in ensuring that scarce resources are used efficiently. Thus, opportunity costs are not restricted to monetary or financial costs: the real cost of output foregone, lost time, pleasure or any other benefit that provides utility should also be considered opportunity costs.
Capital and interest.
The Austrian theory of capital and interest was first developed by Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk. He stated that interest rates and profits are determined by two factors, namely, supply and demand in the market for final goods and time preference.
Böhm-Bawerk's theory was a response to Marx's labor theory of value and capital. Böhm-Bawerk's theory attacked the viability of the labor theory of value in the light of the transformation problem. He argued that capitalists do not exploit workers; they "accommodate" workers by providing them with income well in advance of the revenue from the output they helped to produce. Böhm-Bawerk's theory equates capital intensity with the degree of roundaboutness of production processes. Böhm-Bawerk also argued that the law of marginal utility necessarily implies the classical law of costs. Some Austrian economists therefore entirely reject the notion that interest rates are affected by liquidity preference.
Inflation.
Mises believed that money prices and wages will inevitably rise when the quantity of money and bank credit is increased. He therefore used the term "inflation" to mean an excessive increase of the money supply and not, as is the common usage, to refer to price inflation. In Mises' view, inflation is the result of policies of the government or central bank which result in an increase in the circulating money supply. Following Mises, the modern-day Austrian School argues that this semantic distinction is critical to public discussion of price inflation, and that price inflation can only be prevented by strict control of the money supply. Mises wrote:
In theoretical investigation there is only one meaning that can rationally be attached to the expression Inflation: an increase in the quantity of money (in the broader sense of the term, so as to include fiduciary media as well), that is not offset by a corresponding increase in the need for money (again in the broader sense of the term), so that a fall in the objective exchange-value of money must occur.
Economist Richard Timberlake criticised von Mises' view that "inflation" must refer to an increase in the money supply. Timberlake noted that economists since the time of John Stuart Mill have recognized the distinction between increases in the money stock and increases in the general level of money prices. Timberlake stated that Mises' view has repeatedly been proven false and that statistical measurement of the aggregate price level is necessary in order test the empirical validity of Mises' theory. Economist Paul Krugman has argued against Austrian views on inflation. Krugman points out that in the period from 2007 to late 2012, the monetary base increased by more than 350% with concomitant price inflation of less than 3% per year. According to Krugman, "If you believe that... expanding credit will simply result in too much money chasing too few goods, and hence a lot of inflation... the failure of high inflation to materialize amounts to a decisive rejection of that [Austrian] model".
Economic calculation problem.
The economic calculation problem is a criticism of socialist economics. It was first proposed by Max Weber in 1920. This led to Mises discussing Weber's idea with his student Friedrich Hayek, who expanded upon it to such an extent that it became a key reason cited for the awarding of his Nobel prize. The problem referred to is that of how to distribute resources effectively in an economy.
On the economic calculation problem.
Austrian theory emphasizes the organizing power of the price mechanism. Mises and Hayek argued that the price mechanism is the only viable solution to the economic calculation problem, as the price mechanism co-ordinates supply and investment decisions most efficiently. Without the information efficiently and effectively provided by market prices, socialism lacks a method to efficiently allocate resources over an extended period of time in any market where the price mechanism is effective (an example where the price mechanism may not work is in the relatively confined area of public and common goods). Those who agree with this criticism argue it is a refutation of socialism and that it shows that a socialist planned economy could never work in the long term for the vast bulk of the economy and has very limited potential application. The debate raged in the 1920s and 1930s, and that specific period of the debate has come to be known by historians of economic thought as "The Socialist Calculation Debate."
Mises argued in a 1920 article "Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth" that the pricing systems in socialist economies were necessarily deficient because if government owned the means of production, then no prices could be obtained for capital goods as they were merely internal transfers of goods in a socialist system and not "objects of exchange," unlike final goods. Therefore, they were unpriced and hence the system would be necessarily inefficient since the central planners would not know how to allocate the available resources efficiently. This led him to declare "…that rational economic activity is impossible in a socialist commonwealth." Mises's declaration has been criticized as overstating the strength of his case, in describing socialism as impossible, rather than having to contend with a source of inefficiency.
Business cycles.
The Austrian theory of the business cycle ("ABCT") focuses on the credit cycle as the cause of business cycles. Although later elaborated by Hayek and others, the theory was first set forth by von Mises, who believed that an expansion of the money supply, with artificially low interest rates, will lead to misallocation of capital (called malinvestment) by businesses. Austrian economist Murray Rothbard, wrote that "Mises’ theory shows the complete workings of the boom-bust cycle: the inflationary injection of bank credit, fostered by government; a boom marked by malinvestments caused by inflation’s tampering with the signals of the free market; the end of inflation revealing these unfortunate malinvestments; and finally, the depression as the correction by the free market of the wastes and distortions of the boom." Rothbard also said that Mises' theory is one of the few that integrates macro- with micro- economics, thereby supporting other Austrian theories regarding price coordination and capital structure.
Most research regarding the theory finds that it is inconsistent with empirical evidence. Economists such as Gordon Tullock, Bryan Caplan, Milton Friedman, and Paul Krugman have said that they regard the theory as incorrect. In 1969, Friedman argued that the theory is not consistent with empirical evidence and using newer data in 1993 reached the same conclusion. However, in 2001, economist James P. Keeler argued that the theory is consistent with empirical evidence, and, in 2006, economist Robert Mulligan also argued that the theory is consistent with empirical evidence.
Assertions.
According to the theory, a boom-bust cycle of malinvestment is generated by excessive and unsustainable credit expansion to businesses and individual borrowers by banks. This credit creation makes it appear as if the supply of "saved funds" ready for investment has increased: the supply of funds for investment purposes increases, and the interest rate declines. Borrowers take their newly acquired funds and bid up the prices of capital and other producers' goods, thereby stimulating a shift of investment from consumer goods to capital goods industries. Austrians contend that this shift is unsustainable and must reverse itself in due course, and that the re-adjustment process will be more violent and disruptive the longer the shift in capital goods industries continues.
The proportion of consumption to saving or investment is determined by people's time preferences, which is the degree to which they prefer present to future satisfactions. Thus, the pure interest rate is determined by the time preferences of the individuals in society, and the final market rates of interest reflect the pure interest rate plus or minus the entrepreneurial risk and purchasing power components. Therefore, if the market rate of interest is set lower than this, entrepreneurs will over-invest.
Because they are all competing for the same pool of capital and market share, some entrepreneurs accelerate their borrowing, lest they be beaten to it by other entrepreneurs. A tendency toward over-investment and speculative borrowing in this environment is therefore almost inevitable. This new money then circulates from the business borrowers to the factors of production: to the landowners and capital owners who sold assets to the newly indebted entrepreneurs, and then to the other factors of production in wages, rent, and interest. Austrians conclude that, since time preferences have not changed, people will rush to reestablish the old proportions, and demand will shift back from the higher to the lower orders. In other words, depositors will tend to remove cash from the banking system and spend it (not save it), banks will then ask their borrowers for payment and interest rates and credit conditions will deteriorate.
Austrian business cycle theory does not argue that fiscal restraint or "austerity" will necessarily affect economic growth. Rather, it argues that attempts by central governments to support asset prices, advance funding to insolvent banks, or stimulate the economy with deficit spending will only make the misallocations and malinvestments worse, further distorting the market's pricing information and resource allocation. ABCT therefore asserts that such government policy will prolong the adjustment necessary to return to stable growth. Austrians argue the policy error rests in the government's (and central bank's) weakness or negligence in allowing the "false" credit-fueled boom to begin in the first place, not in having it end with financial crisis or fiscal and monetary "austerity".
The role of central banks.
Austrians generally believe that expansion of bank credit is a significant contributing factor in most business cycles and that excessive credit creation at relatively low interest rates may facilitate excessive capital spending by borrowers. A central bank, by expanding the supply of loanable funds available to banks, may enable or encourage such lending and may indirectly fund the loan market at a lower rate of interest than might prevail if the money supply were fixed.
Murray Rothbard believed that central banks encouraged excessive credit prior to the onset of the Great Depression and that subsequent central bank policies prolonged the Depression by delaying necessary price adjustments in various markets. Rothbard said that in a market with no centralized monetary authority, there would be not have been widespread over-investment because astute entrepreneurs would not all make that error at the same time. He further claimed that astute bankers would have shunned speculative lending and that uninsured depositors would have more carefully monitored the balance sheets of financial institutions, tempering any speculative excesses in the financial markets. In Rothbard's view generalized over-investment (or "malinvestment") is the result of intervention in the money markets by the central bank.
Rothbard wrote that the central bank's centralized control over interest rates and its policy of protect banks from periodic bank runs leads banks to over-expand and under-price credit, thus distorting critical pricing functions of the credit market. Friedrich Hayek, on the other hand, stated that a freely competitive, banking industry tends to be endogenously destabilizing and pro-cyclical, mimicking the effects Rothbard attributes to central bank policy. Hayek stated that the need for central banking control was inescapable.
Etymology.
The School owes its name to members of the German Historical school of economics, who argued against the Austrians during the "Methodenstreit" ("methodology struggle"), in which the Austrians defended the role of theory in economics as distinct from the study or compilation of historical circumstance. In 1883, Menger published "Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences with Special Reference to Economics", which attacked the methods of the Historical school. Gustav von Schmoller, a leader of the Historical school, responded with an unfavorable review, coining the term "Austrian School" in an attempt to characterize the school as outcast and provincial. The label endured and was adopted by the adherents themselves.
First Wave.
The school originated in Vienna, in the Austrian Empire. Carl Menger's 1871 book, "Principles of Economics", is generally considered the founding of the Austrian School. The book was one of the first modern treatises to advance the theory of marginal utility. The Austrian School was one of three founding currents of the marginalist revolution of the 1870s, with its major contribution being the introduction of the subjectivist approach in economics. While marginalism was generally influential, there was also a more specific school that began to coalesce around Menger's work, which came to be known as the “Psychological School,” “Vienna School,” or “Austrian School.” Thorstein Veblen introduced the term neoclassical economics in his "Preconceptions of Economic Science" (1900) to distinguish marginalists in the objective cost tradition of Alfred Marshall from those in the subjective valuation tradition of the Austrian School.
Carl Menger contributions to economic theory were closely followed by that of Böhm-Bawerk and Friedrich von Wieser. These three economists became what is known as the "first wave" of the Austrian School. Böhm-Bawerk wrote extensive critiques of Karl Marx in the 1880s and 1890s, as was part of the Austrians' participation in the late 19th Century "Methodenstreit", during which they attacked the Hegelian doctrines of the Historical School.
Twentieth century.
By the mid-1930s, most economists had embraced what they considered the important contributions of the early Austrians. After World War II, Austrian economics was disregarded or derided by most economists because it rejected mathematical and statistical methods in the study of economics.
Austrian economics after 1940 can be divided into two schools of economic thought, and the school "split" to some degree in the late 20th century. One camp of Austrians, exemplified by Mises, regards neoclassical methodology to be irredeemably flawed; the other camp, exemplified by Friedrich Hayek, accepts a large part of neoclassical methodology and is more accepting of government intervention in the economy.
Influenced by Mises, Henry Hazlitt wrote economics columns and editorials for a number of publications and penned many books on the topic of Austrian economics from the 1930s to the 1980s, notably in a clear and accessible writing style. While he is perhaps best recognized for his book "Economics in One Lesson" (1946), which sold over a million copies, he is also known for "The Failure of the "New Economics" (1959), a line-by-line critique of John Maynard Keynes's "General Theory".
The reputation of the Austrian School rose in the late-20th century due in part to the work of Israel Kirzner and Ludwig Lachmann at New York University, and to renewed public awareness of the work of Hayek after he won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences. Hayek's work was influential in the revival of "laissez-faire" thought in the 20th century.
In the late twentieth century Murray Rothbard worked on topics in political theory and examined economic issues from an anarchist point of view. Rothbard was briefly associated with the Cato Institute and later with the Ludwig von Mises Institute where he was Academic Vice-President until his death in 1995. Rothbard's anarchist views have been promoted and expanded by various other writers associated with the Mises Institute. Rothbard opposed fractional reserve banking, viewing it as a fraudulent contract that should be criminalized as a sub-category of embezzlement.
He advocated the abolition of central banks and fractional-reserve banking, advocating either a 100% reserve gold standard or that each individual should choose what to accept as money, a system called free banking, which he believed would provide a market mechanism to limit credit creation.
Twenty-first century.
Several Austrian economists have made contributions to Austrian economics in the twenty-first century, including noted Spanish economist Jesús Huerta de Soto, Anthony Carilli, Gregory Dempster, Roger Garrison, Steven Horwitz, and Robert Murphy.
Economist Bryan Caplan argues that Austrians have not to appreciated many of the valid contributions of mainstream economics and have often misunderstood modern economics, causing them to overstate their differences with it. For example, many Austrians object to the use of cardinal utility in microeconomic theory; however, microeconomic theorists go to great pains to show that their results hold for all strictly monotonic transformations of utility, and so are true for purely ordinal preferences. The result is that conclusions about utility preferences hold no matter what values are assigned to them.
Economist Paul Krugman has stated that because Austrians do not use "explicit models" they are unaware of holes in their own thinking.
Economist Benjamin Klein has criticized the economic methodological work of Austrian economist Israel M. Kirzner. While praising Kirzner for highlighting shortcomings in traditional methodology, Klein argued that Kirzner did not provide a viable alternative for economic methodology. Economist Tyler Cowen has written that Kirzner's theory of entrepreneurship can ultimately be reduced to a neoclassical search model and is thus not uin the radical subjectivist tradition of Austrian praxeology. Cowen states that Kirzner's entrepreneurs can be modeled in mainstream terms of search.
Economist Jeffrey Sachs argues that among developed countries, those with high rates of taxation and high social welfare spending perform better on most measures of economic performance compared to countries with low rates of taxation and low social outlays. He concludes that Friedrich Hayek was wrong to argue that high levels of government spending harms an economy, and "a generous social-welfare state is not a road to serfdom but rather to fairness, economic equality and international competitiveness." Austrian economist Sudha Shenoy responded by arguing that countries with large public sectors have grown more slowly.
Methodology.
Critics generally argue that Austrian economics lacks scientific rigor and rejects scientific methods and the use of empirical data in modelling economic behavior. Some economists describe Austrian methodology as being "a priori" or non-empirical.
Economist Mark Blaug has criticized over-reliance on methodological individualism, arguing it would rule out all macroeconomic propositions that cannot be reduced to microeconomic ones, and hence reject almost the whole of received macroeconomics.
Economist Thomas Mayer has stated that Austrians advocate a rejection of the scientific method which involves the development of empirically falsifiable theories. Furthermore, many supporters of using models of market behavior to analyze and test economic theory argue that economists have developed numerous experiments that elicit useful information about individual preferences.
Capital and interest.
Many social anarchists object to the theory of time preference being applied to an economy as a whole in a capitalist society. They argue that the theory fails to take into account that making profits in a capitalist society is not the provision of future means of consumption, but rather profits for their own sake.
Business cycle theory.
According to John Quiggin, most economists believe that the Austrian business cycle theory is incorrect because of its incompleteness and other problems.
Theoretical objections.
Some economists argue that Austrian business cycle theory requires bankers and investors to exhibit a kind of irrationality, because the Austrian theory posits that investors will be fooled repeatedly (by temporarily low interest rates) into making unprofitable investment decisions. Bryan Caplan writes: "Why does Rothbard think businessmen are so incompetent at forecasting government policy? He credits them with entrepreneurial foresight about all market-generated conditions, but curiously finds them unable to forecast government policy, or even to avoid falling prey to simple accounting illusions generated by inflation and deflation... Particularly in interventionist economies, it would seem that natural selection would weed out businesspeople with such a gigantic blind spot." Austrian economist Robert Murphy argues that it is difficult for investors to make sound business choices because they cannot know what the interest rate would be if it were set by the market.
Economist Paul Krugman has argued that the theory cannot explain changes in unemployment over the business cycle. Austrian business cycle theory postulates that business cycles are caused by the misallocation of resources from consumption to investment during "booms", and out of investment during "busts". Krugman argues that because total spending is equal to total income in an economy, the theory implies that the reallocation of resources during "busts" would increase employment in consumption industries, whereas in reality, spending declines in all sectors of an economy during recessions. He also argues that according to the theory the initial "booms" would also cause resource reallocation, which implies an increase in unemployment during booms as well. In response, Austrian economist David Gordon argues that Krugman's argument is dependent on a misrepresentation of the theory. He furthermore argues that prices on consumption goods may go up as a result of the investment bust, which could mean that the amount spent on consumption could increase even though the quantity of goods consumed has not. Furthermore, Roger Garrison argues that a false boom caused by artificially low interest rates would cause a boom in consumption goods as well as investment goods (with a decrease in "middle goods"), thus explaining the jump in unemployment at the end of a boom. Many Austrians also argue that capital allocated to investment goods cannot be quickly augmented to create consumption goods.
Economist Jeffery Hummel is critical of Hayek's explanation of labor asymmetry in booms and busts. He argues that Hayek makes peculiar assumptions about demand curves for labor in his explanation of how a decrease in investment spending creates unemployment. He also argues that the labor asymmetry can be explained in terms of a change in real wages, but this explanation fails to explain the business cycle in terms of resource allocation.
Milton Friedman objected to the policy implications of the theory, stating the following in a 1998 interview:
I think the Austrian business-cycle theory has done the world a great deal of harm. If you go back to the 1930s, which is a key point, here you had the Austrians sitting in London, Hayek and Lionel Robbins, and saying you just have to let the bottom drop out of the world. You’ve just got to let it cure itself. You can’t do anything about it. You will only make it worse. You have Rothbard saying it was a great mistake not to let the whole banking system collapse. I think by encouraging that kind of do-nothing policy both in Britain and in the United States, they did harm.
Empirical objections.
Hummel argues that the Austrian explanation of the business cycle fails on empirical grounds. In particular, he notes that investment spending remained positive in all recessions where there are data, except for the Great Depression. He argues that this casts doubt on the notion that recessions are caused by a reallocation of resources from industrial production to consumption, since he argues that the Austrian business cycle theory implies that net investment should be below zero during recessions. In response, Austrian economist Walter Block argues that the misallocation during booms does not preclude the possibility of demand increasing overall.
In 1969, economist Milton Friedman, after examining the history of business cycles in the U.S., concluded that "The Hayek-Mises explanation of the business cycle is contradicted by the evidence. It is, I believe, false." He analyzed the issue using newer data in 1993, and again reached the same conclusion.
Referring to Friedman's discussion of the business cycle, Austrian economist Roger Garrison stated, "Friedman's empirical findings are broadly consistent with both Monetarist and Austrian views", and goes on to argue that although Friedman's model "describes the economy's performance at the highest level of aggregation; Austrian theory offers an insightful account of the market process that might underlie those aggregates."
